# js-admissions-controller

This controller is an admission webhook with the following features:
- admission rules (mutate, validate) are defined in CRD (`CustomResourceDefinitions`)
- CRD can be defined at cluster level (`ClusterJsAdmissions`) or namespace level (`JsAdmissions`)
- mutations and validations are coded in javascript, allowing fast development and deployment

## A brief history

The idea for this project was born during the installation and configuration of SAS Viya4 for a customer.

In SAS Viya4, it is often necessary to type the nodes of the kubernetes cluster according to their role, and this is done by using the native taints and tolerations of kubernetes.

Unfortunately, taints are global to all pods on a node, which can impact other components than those deployed by SAS Viya4, like loggers or drivers, because it forbids them to start on tainted nodes if they don't have the appropriate tolerations.

To solve this problem, the first approach was to modify all the objects (pods, podtemplates, ...) generated in the installation phase (with kustomize), by updating their affinities. But this requires to know in advance the exact list of all the objects that will be created by the operator in charge of the deployment.

An alternative idea then came up: make the modifications at the creation of the pods, by developing a mutating admission webhook, and to facilitate the development and testing of the 150 pods to be changed, the code must be located elsewhere thatn in the webhook and coded in a dynamic language like javascript. 

## Install

Files:
- `kubernetes/crds.yaml` contains the 2 custom resource definitions JsAdmissions and ClusterJsAdmissions
- `kubernetes/deploy.yaml` contains the deployment for the web hooks controller
- `kubernetes/hooks.yaml` contains the default pod hooks for mutation and validation
- `kubernetes/namespace.yaml` contains the namespace definition, default is `kube-jsadmissions`
- `kubernetes/rbac.yaml` contains the RBAC to allow watching pods resources
- `kubernetes/install.sh` contains a simple install script

### Configuration

By default, the admission hook receives CREATE for pods on all namespaces.

To add other apiGroups/versions:
- update `kubernetes/hooks.yaml` to add additionnal apiGroups/versions or create a new file based on it
- update `kubernetes/rbac.yaml` to add additionnal rules to watch or create a new file with new rules and bind the new roles to the `jsadmissions` service account

### Certificates

CA and certificates are automatically generated by the install script.

Either update the script or provide your own certificates in the `kubernetes/certs` folder.

### Deploy in Kubernetes

Once all files are correcly updated, simply run the `./kubernetes/install.sh` script to perform installation.

This script can also be used to update the configuration as well as upgrade the docker image version.

### Tests

It is possible to use test installation by using a simple admission:

```sh
$ kubectl create namespace test-jsa
$ kubectl apply -f kubernetes/test-admission.yaml
$ kubectl apply -f kubernetes/test-pods.yaml
```

```sh
$ kubectl get pods -n test-jsa
NAME               READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
test-log           1/1     Running   0          9s
test-log-pending   0/1     Pending   0          9s

$ kubectl get pods -n test-jsa -o json | jq '.items[].metadata.annotations | to_entries[] | [.key,.value] | join("=")' -rc | grep ^jsa
jsadmissions.momiji.com/date=2023-05-21T21:19:07.228Z
jsadmissions.momiji.com/pods=1
jsadmissions.momiji.com/date=2023-05-21T21:19:07.202Z
jsadmissions.momiji.com/pods=0
```

## Setup development environment

Requirements:
- ubuntu
- docker (sudo apt install docker.io)
- microk8s with registry addon (snap install microk8s)
- kubectl (downloaded from )
- jq (sudo apt install jq)

Buid and deploy image into microk8s registry:

```sh
$ make
$ make docker
$ make local
```

Tests:

```sh
$ ./kubernetes/tests/test-deploy.sh
$ ./kubernetes/tests/test-pods.sh
```

To remove all objects except the CRD, simply delete `test-jsa` namespace:

```sh
$ kubectl delete namespace test-jsa
$ kubectl delete validatingwebhookconfigurations.admissionregistration.k8s.io test-jsa 
$ kubectl delete mutatingwebhookconfigurations.admissionregistration.k8s.io test-jsa 
```

## Javascript specification

```text
// actions
function jsa_mutate(op, obj, [sync], [state]) -> { Allowed: bool, Message: str, Result: obj }
function jsa_validate(op, obj, [sync], [state]) -> { Allowed: bool, Message: str }

// events
function jsa_init([state])
function jsa_created(obj, [sync], [state])
function jsa_updated(obj, old, [sync], [state])
function jsa_deleted(obj, [sync], [state])

// utils
function jsa_find(kind, namespace) -> [obj...]
function jsa_log(s...)
function jsa_logf(s...)
```

### Method names

All plugin methods are prefixed by `jsa_`.
It is recommended to avoid prefixing custom methods with jsa_ and consider it is reserved.

### Global variables

It is best to prevent use of global variables oto keep values across calls.
Use the `state` object for this.

## Javascript methods to implement

For parameters:
- names are case-sensitive
- names in brackets like `[sync]` or `[state]` are optional
- order is not important: `jsa_validate(obj,sync)` and `jsa_validate(sync,obj)` will both work correctly

Optional parameters:
- sync: when present, method is called synchronized, with value set to true
- state: state object that can be used to keep data

### jsa_mutate(op, obj, [sync]) -> { Allowed: bool, Message: str, Result: obj }

Parameters:
- op: operation, one of CREATE, UPDATE, DELETE
- obj: the object, like a Pod or a Deployment

Result:
- Allowed: boolean
- Message: error message, only used when Allowed if false
- Result: altered object, only used when Allowed is true

The mutation will fail only and only if:
- the return value is not null or undefined
- the return value contains a field Allowed
- the value of Allowed is exactly false

In all other case, the mutation will succeed:
- if the field Result is present and not null or undefined, the mutation is computed by comparing obj and Result
- otherwise, no patch is applied

Mutation and patch are logged when at least one Allowed is returned with a non-empty patch.

### jsa_validate(op, obj, [sync]) -> { Allowed: bool, Message: str }

Parameters:
- op: operation, one of CREATE, UPDATE, DELETE
- obj: the object, like a Pod or a Deployment

Return value:
- Allowed: boolean
- Message: error message, only used when Allowed if false
- Result: altered object, only used when Allowed is true

The validation will fail only and only if:
- the return value is not null or undefined
- the return value contains a field Allowed
- the value of Allowed is exactly false

In all other case, the validation will succeed.

Validation is logged when at least one Allowed is returned.

### jsa_init([state])

> There is no `sync` parameter as this method is always called synchronized.

### jsa_created(obj, [sync])

Parameters:
- obj: the object created, like a Pod or a Deployment

There is no return value for this function.

### jsa_updated(obj, old, [sync])

Parameters:
- oldObj: the object before update, like a Pod or a Deployment
- newObj: the object after update, like a Pod or a Deployment

There is no return value for this function.

> Remember that updates are sent each time the resourceVersion field of the object is changed.
> This can happen when object is patched, but also when object status changes.

### jsa_deleted(obj, [sync])

Parameters:
- obj: the object created, like a Pod or a Deployment

## Javascript utilities

TODO

## Examples

### Adding a new annotation to all pods

In this example we want to add a new annotation `annotation.io/test: 1` to all pods.

Here, we simply need to:
- implement `jsa_mutate` function to update the object

```js
// entrypoints
function jsa_mutate(op, obj) {
    if (op != "CREATE" || obj.kind !== "Pod") return;
    if (obj.metadata.annotations == null)
        obj.metadata.annotations = {};
    obj.metadata.annotations["jsadmissions.momiji.com/test"] = "1";
    return { Allowed: true, Result: obj };
}
```

### Limit the number of pods accross multiple namespaces

In this example we want to count the number of pods created across multiple namespaces, to prevent going above a limit of 40 pods.

Here, we would need to:
- implement `jsa_init` function to initialize the value
- implement `jsa_created` and `jsa_deleted` functions to update the value
- implement `jsa_validate` to test and eventually prevent object creation when limit is reached
- use `state` to store the number of existing pods
- use `sync` to be able to update this value atomically

```js
// entrypoints
function jsa_init(state) {
    state.podCount = 0;
}
function jsa_created(obj, sync, state) {
    // Check object kind and namespace
    if (!check(obj)) return;
    // Update state
    state.podCount++;
}
function jsa_deleted(obj, sync, state) {
    // Check object kind and namespace
    if (!check(obj)) return;
    // Update state
    state.podCount--;
}
function jsa_validate(op, obj, sync, state) {
    // Check object kind and namespace
    if (op != "CREATE" || !check(obj)) return;
    // Check pod count < limit
    if (state.podCount >= LIMIT) {
        return { Allowed: false, Message: "Max number of pods has been reached" };
    }
    return;
}
// custom code
var NAMESPACE_REGEX = /^default($|-)/;
var POD_LIMIT = 40;
function check(obj) {
    return obj.kind === "Pod" && obj.metadata.namespace.match(NAMESPACE_REGEX) != null;
}
```
